JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
health care legislation in
critical condition again.
Republican senators struggle
to muster enough votes to pass
even a slimmed-down reform bill.
And the White House is busy with
its own battles, as backlash
heats up over the president's
call to ban transgender people
from serving in the military
and the public fallout with
his own attorney general.
Then: stuck between
a rock and a visa.
One of the nation's top vacation
spots struggles to get seasonal
employees as immigration rules
become more restrictive.
JOY MCNULTY, Owner, Lobster
Pot: It's impossible to
run a business when you
don't know if you're
getting 43 of your 96 people.
The rest of them
are all Americans.
This year, we were
open six weeks late.
Next year, we may
not open at all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican
efforts to pass health
care reform ran into
even more roadblocks
this evening.
A group of key senators
balked at voting for
what some have called the
last resort, a version
labeled skinny repeal.
This came as plans were
laid for debate and maybe
a final vote later tonight.
Our Lisa Desjardins
begins our coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: A long day
of debate setting up a longer
night of votes, with Republicans
stressing the
failures of Obamacare.
SEN.
LAMAR ALEXANDER (R),
Tennessee: Conditions
have changed in Tennessee.
Our insurance market is --
quote -- "very near collapse."
That means that up to 350,000
individuals in our state,
songwriters, workers, farmers,
who buy their insurance on
individual market are sitting
there worrying in July and in
August whether they
will have any option to
buy insurance in 2018.
LISA DESJARDINS: And Democrats
insisting that Republicans'
plans could mean no choices,
especially for the poor.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I), Vermont:
Where there is a serious
disagreement is, we say that the
children of this country who
have serious illnesses have
the freedom to stay alive,
even if their parents do
not have a lot of money.
LISA DESJARDINS: The debate
all leading lead up to a
whirlwind called vote-a-rama.
Senators will take up amendment
after amendment with little
debate and five-minute votes.
All or nearly all
are expected to fail.
Then, at the end of the
legislative marathon,
comes the key moment.
Republicans plan to propose the
one idea they think could pass
now: a stripped-down, minimal
repeal.
It would abolish Obamacare's
individual and employer
mandates, as well as
one tax on medical
devices.
It would leave Medicaid and much
of the rest of the Affordable
Care Act essentially unchanged.
Some on Capitol Hill call
it the skinny repeal,
but the nonpartisan
Congressional Budget Office
found it would mean 15
million fewer Americans
with health insurance.
And there is another issue:
The CBO also found the idea
would save $78 billion.
But to comply with special rules
that Republicans are using,
this plan would need to save at
least $133 billion, the score
for the original House bill.
As the votes stack up, so has
more White House pushback at
Alaska Senator Lisa Murkowski,
who voted against
starting debate.
First reported by Alaska
Dispatch News, Murkowski,
along with fellow Alaskan
Senator Dan Sullivan,
received grave phone calls
from President Trump's
Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke.
He warned that the no vote
put Alaska's future with the
administration in jeopardy.
The paper speculated
jeopardy meant problems for
Alaska's energy concerns.
Murkowski is
standing her ground.
SEN.
LISA MURKOWSKI (R), Alaska:
I'm a pretty strong and
independent individual.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meantime, as
to the endgame, Republicans
admit, if they pass a bill, it
would be a placeholder to
negotiate with the House.
SEN.
LAMAR ALEXANDER: It is not
a solution to Affordable
Care Act problems.
But is its a solution
to how we get to a place
where we can write a
solution to the Affordable
Care Act problems.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meantime,
Democrats predict a last-minute
bill would backfire.
SEN.
PATTY MURRAY (D), Washington:
If they jam it through, they
will be held accountable
for the millions of people
who lose care and the millions
and millions more who will see
their premiums go up.
LISA DESJARDINS: Everyone
on both sides is looking
at a long night.
SEN.
JOHN KENNEDY (R), Louisiana:
You can sleep out in the
hall in between votes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, late
today, what we were suggesting
as we introduced your piece
is you had a group of
Republicans coming out
and saying they're not
even prepared to vote
for this so-called skinny
repeal, which many had thought
was going to be the last resort.
LISA DESJARDINS: This is a late
and rather potentially pivotal
twist led by Senator Lindsey
Graham of South Carolina.
Also, John McCain was
standing there, as well as
Ron Johnson of Wisconsin.
All three of those senators
said they will not vote for
that so-called skinny repeal
or that smaller repeal bill
unless they are guaranteed
that that is not the end, that
they are guaranteed that
the chance to debate a
larger bill what's called
conference committee
with the House.
And that's critical.
That means that we won't see the
health care end -- the health
care debate end this weekend,
as some people were
starting to talk about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa, how did
they get to the point where
right here at the -- beyond the
11th hour, you still
have Republican senators
saying they're not
comfortable with the options
they're being offered?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think
there is a graduate-level
class and probably
several in the works that
will look at that
exact question, Judy.
But, from my viewpoint, one of
the issues here was that they
didn't go through the usual
process.
They didn't go
through committees.
They didn't have
public discussion.
They did not have
drafts of this bill.
And, in fact, Judy, as I talk
to you right now, there is
still no draft of what could
be the final proposal
before senators.
I talked to Ron Johnson, who
said he wants to improve this
bill, along with those other
senators, to give more money
to states in block grants.
I said, when will your
amendment be drafted?
He said, "We can't draft
it now because we don't
know what we're amending."
So, I think the process itself
has led to these large questions
here near the very end.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When are the
arguments, Lisa, that are mainly
being used by the Republican
leadership, and for that
matter by the White House?
Do they have any presence
as this moves closer to an
attempt to pass something?
LISA DESJARDINS: Vice
President Pence has certainly
been an important factor.
He was here today speaking
to small business owners.
I have not seen him on
the Senate side today,
but I understand he
has been making phone
calls.
But I think the basic gist of
this, Judy, is rather simple.
Republican leaders in the
Senate seem to be saying,
vote for this or nothing.
This is your one shot.
Initially, they were
saying, we will add to it,
we will improve it later.
But late today, they seemed
to be saying, we actually
could pass this with the House
this weekend.
And that's another important
development to watch, Judy.
The House has now signaled to
its members that they should
be ready to stay this weekend,
and they are preparing a rule
that would allow them to pass
anything, including a health
care bill, same day.
So if the Senate passes
something, the House could
pass it very quickly.
But just like on the Senate,
it's not clear that the House
Republican Conference supports
any one vehicle.
Very complicated, and right
now, it seems the last hour has
not worked to the leadership's
advantage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, as we sit
here or stand here, or you stand
there, Lisa, as the evening
gets under way, you're saying
this is truly up in the air?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
It is.
And I think it will
be a long night.
And that vote-a-rama that
we explained, right now, the
timing of that is on hold.
I know this, Judy.
A lot of people
have ordered pizza.
I have brought my toothbrush.
My husband doesn't know that
yet, but I think we just don't
know what's going to happen,
but it will be an
important next 24 hours.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Toothbrush
better than pizza.
Lisa, thank you.
And good luck
staying up all night.
LISA DESJARDINS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as you
have heard, we keep talking
about so-called skinny repeal.
Let's look at exactly
what that means.
And, for that, we
bring in Sarah Kliff.
She is a senior policy
correspondent for
the Web site Vox.
She has written
extensively on health care.
Welcome back to the program.
SARAH KLIFF, Vox: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sarah, so we
are throwing around this term.
As we heard from Lisa, there
are senators who are saying
even this may not be acceptable
to them.
But for purposes of
conversation, it is
going to be one of the
measures, we think, on the
table.
What does it mean?
SARAH KLIFF: So, it basically
means repealing the individual
mandate, this requirement to
purchase health coverage.
We have seen other parts come
in, come out, the medical
device tax, defunding Planned
Parenthood, but, at the
core, it's the repeal
of the requirement to
purchase health coverage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, it's
rolling back some of Obamacare,
some of the Affordable Care
Act, but not as much as
full-blown repeal would be?
SARAH KLIFF: It's certainly
not as much, so compared to
the other bills, the one that
passed through the House, for
example, the American Health
Care Act, which would get
rid of much more in the health
care law, the essential health
benefits, for example, this
is smaller, but it would
affect a lot of people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and that's
what I want to ask you about,
because you wrote a piece
for Vox today which was
titled "Skinny Repeal
Isn't Skinny at All."
SARAH KLIFF: Yes, this is
a bill would cause about 15
million people to lose coverage.
So, I kind of say skinny repeal
is a misnomer, that this would
really change the individual
market.
The Medicaid expansion, that
would mostly function the same,
but for people who purchase
coverage in the individual
market, they could expect
premium increases of 20 percent.
A lot of people would
drop out of the market.
I don't think most
Americans would see that
as a skinny, small change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the
things you were writing about
is the integral role that the
individual mandate
plays in all this.
Remind us why that
matters so much.
SARAH KLIFF: That's a
requirement that nearly
all of us in the United
States have to purchase
health insurance.
And the draft version of the
Affordable Care Act, they
knew that was unpopular.
They included it because
they needed a way to
get healthy people into
the insurance market.
If you don't have mandate,
the fear is that only the sick
people who really need coverage
sign up, premiums get really
high, you could enter a death
spiral, where premiums just
go higher and higher.
So, even Republican senators
agree on this point, that
the mandate, it is what makes
the market work.
It gets the healthy
people to sign up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that explains
the number you gave at the
beginning of our conversation,
the 15 million.
The larger repeal would
have meant 24, 25 million
people losing coverage.
But you're saying even
this is 15, 16 million.
SARAH KLIFF: Yes, the big
difference is Medicaid.
So, those other bills,
they would have ended
Medicaid expansion,
would have had much, much
more significant
Medicaid losses.
And there are actually some
Medicaid losses associated with
individual mandate repeals.
The CBO thinks that, if
there isn't a mandate,
if people don't hear this
message health insurance
is mandatory in the United
States, they might not
sign up for Medicaid.
But the real challenge here
is in the individual markets.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it does
sound like, with this, as we
said, late-day news conference,
Senator Lindsey Graham, other
Republicans coming out and
saying, we're not prepared
to support this unless we know
the House is going to work
with us on this, indicates that
they're getting some
of this message.
SARAH KLIFF: Yes,
they understand.
Lindsey Graham was saying, you
know, in his press conference,
we don't think this is good
policy.
We don't think it's good to
take the individual mandate
out of the marketplace.
So they recognize
these consequences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sarah Kliff
with Vox watching it all very
closely, thank you so much.
SARAH KLIFF: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will
be turning to Republican
Senator James Lankford
for his insights right
after the news summary.
In the day's other news:
The U.S. military's top
commander said there
will not be any changes
regarding transgender
troops for now.
President Trump tweeted
yesterday that he's reinstating
the ban on transgender service
members.
Today, in an internal memo,
Marine General and Joint Chiefs
Chairman Joe Dunford said
that pending actual direction
-- quote -- "We will continue
to treat all our personnel with
respect."
The Army's chief of staff,
General Mark Milley, echoed
that in a Washington appearance.
GEN.
MARK MILLEY, U.S. Army Chief
of Staff: We grow up and learn
to obey the chain of command.
And my chain of command is the
secretary of the Army and the
secretary of defense, right,
and the president.
So we will work through the
implementation guidance when
we get it, and then we will
move from there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Defense
Secretary Jim Mattis has been on
vacation, and has made no public
comment on reinstating the ban.
The U.S. House of
Representatives has
approved $1.6 billion for
President Trump's proposed
wall on the Mexican border.
That's the amount he
formally asked for in May.
The vote today attached the
money to a much larger bill
that includes a major increase
in defense spending.
That now goes to the Senate.
A top Senate Republican had
sharp words for the president
today over Attorney General
Jeff Sessions.
Mr. Trump has repeatedly
attacked Sessions for
recusing himself in the
Russia investigation.
But Senator Lindsey
Graham, who we have been
hearing about, warned that
there will be -- quote
- - "holy hell" to pay
if Sessions is fired.
He also warned against
getting rid of special
counsel Bob Mueller.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: Any effort to go after
Mueller could be the beginning
of the end of the Trump
presidency, unless Mueller
did something wrong.
Right now, I have no
reason to believe that
Mueller is compromised.
If you got reason to believe
he is compromised and shouldn't
be serving as special counsel,
let me know.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Speaker of the
House Paul Ryan also said that
Mueller should stay where he
is and continue doing his job.
Attorney General Sessions was
traveling in El Salvador today.
He said again he will serve
as long as the president wants
him to, but he acknowledged
it hasn't been -- quote
-- "the best week."
The U.S. State Department is
condemning Iran's claim that
it launched an advanced rocket
into space.
The announcement today
said it happened at a
site east of Tehran.
State TV said the rocket
could carry a satellite
weighing about 550 pounds.
The U.S. says it could lead
to long-range missiles, and
violates the spirit of the Iran
nuclear accord.
Clashes erupted today between
Palestinians and Israeli
police near a Jerusalem mosque.
Thousands rushed to pray there
after Israel finished removing
security devices that had
triggered a boycott.
Palestinians threw stones and
Israeli police fired back with
tear gas and stun grenades.
The Red Crescent said
that 37 people were hurt.
Each side blamed the
other for the trouble.
Back in this country,
investigators are asking
why a ride at the Ohio
State Fair broke apart
Wednesday evening and
killed a teenager.
Two others were critically hurt.
This cell phone video, slowed
down, captured part of the
Fire Ball ride giving way, just
before it hurled
people to the ground.
The fair opened as
scheduled today, but all
rides were shut down.
Governor John Kasich promised
complete inspections.
GOV.
JOHN KASICH (R), Ohio: I
think about those people
that were hit by debris.
I think about that moment
when some were thrown
from that carriage.
That's a nightmare.
It's a terrible situation.
But all we can do is what is
humanly possible to make sure
that we provide the safety and
the inspections.
JUDY WOODRUFF: State
inspectors had checked the
ride before it began operating.
Now officials in several other
states are saying they have
shut down these Fire Ball
rides as well.
Kansas' embattled Governor
Sam Brownback is set to become
U.S. ambassador-at-large for
religious freedom.
The White House announced
the appointment last night.
The Republican's popularity
has plummeted over steep tax
cuts that led to severe budget
problems in Kansas.
But conservative religious
groups pushed Brownback's
nomination, for his
opposition to abortion
and to same-sex marriage.
A court in China has handed a
first-of-its-kind victory to
that country's LGBT community.
The verdict today sided
with a man who said that
he was fired from his job
for being transgender.
The court ruled that workers
cannot be discriminated
against for ethnicity,
race, gender or religion.
The head of the Boy Scouts
of America apologized
today for President
Trump's speech this week
at the Scouts'
national jamboree.
Michael Surbaugh said,
in an open letter --
quote - - "We sincerely
regret that politics were
inserted into the
scouting program."
The president appeared
Monday night before
thousands of Scouts,
visitors and staff convened
in West Virginia.
He laced his speech with a
series of partisan attacks.
And today on Wall Street,
tech stocks slumped, but the
blue chips set a new record.
The Dow Jones industrial
average gained 85 points
to close at 21796.
The Nasdaq fell 40 points,
and the S&P 500 slipped two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a key senator in the middle
of the contentious health care
debate; a shortage of seasonal
workers at one of the nation's
top vacation spots; the
feuds dividing the White House
and the Capitol; and much more.
Back to health care now.
At this hour, its fate
remains uncertain.
Republicans have not been
able to muster enough support
among their own ranks.
I spoke to one of them, Senator
James Lankford of Oklahoma,
just shortly before four of his
colleagues said that they'd
vote no without assurances from
the House of Representatives.
I began by asking the senator
if he thinks any version of
the health care bill will pass.
REP.
JAMES LANKFORD (R), Oklahoma:
I do actually, but I don't
think it's the final version.
What we have is the House
will have version, the
Senate will have a version.
Neither of us want it to be the
final version at this point.
It will go to a conference
committee, and we will work
out the differences, and there
will be significant differences
between the House and Senate,
and then bring a final version
out after CBO can score
it sometime in September.
So, CBO has taken about
four weeks to score
just about everything
we put out, so we have
got to be able to give them a
lot more time again to be able
to run through scoring, and
then we will be able to
have that final vote.
So, this week and the next
24 hours is a step again, but
definitely not the final step.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, in terms
that voters, that a layman
could understand, what is mainly
this legislation going to
consist of as it comes out
of the Senate, do you think?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: So, this
version that will come out, as I
mentioned, is just a step that's
coming out.
It will deal with some basic
things, like the individual
mandate, the employer mandate,
state flexibility in allowing
states to have greater options.
When the Affordable Care Act was
passed, it took all the control
of health care to Washington,
D.C., away from all the states.
And so we want to be
able to return some of
that control back, when
prices were much cheaper
in the time before, when the
Affordable Care Act was passed.
So those will be
the basic elements.
There will be some other
smaller parts to it.
It's basically the employer
mandate, individual
mandate, and state control
vs. federal control.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as you
know, Senator, Democrats and
even a number of Republicans
are saying what's being called
skinny repeal, which is, I
gather, what you're referring
to...
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... would leave,
what, more than 15 million
Americans without coverage.
Other versions would leave many
more millions without coverage.
Any one of these versions,
we're told, would raise
the cost of premiums.
How do you explain a
vote to support that?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: So,
again, today's vote
is not the final vote.
I understand that.
They're trying to score
something that's not
finished by any means.
So, that's one big piece of it.
The other one is to be able to
look at how CBO scores this.
CBO scores -- they basically
assume that if there is not a
mandate to buy it, most people
won't buy the insurance products
that are put out there under
the Affordable Care Act.
So, literally, there's
nine million people right
now on the exchanges.
They assume 22 million
people won't have insurance
in the days ahead based
on them changing this.
Now, this may seem odd, and it
only works in an economist's
mind, that only nine million
people have it, 22 million
people lose it in that sense.
But here's what's
really going on.
Of the mine million people
that are having it, CBO says,
if they're given the choice
to be able to buy it, many of
the individuals don't want to
buy that product, and they only
buy it because they're
forced to buy that product.
So that's the number
that's sitting out there.
I would also say, in my state,
CBO never saw in their original
estimates when the Affordable
Care Act passed that in my
state the insurance rates would
go up over 200 percent for the
individuals that were
buying their insurance.
So CBO is making their best
guess, but I can assure you they
don't always guess correctly.
No one can really see
into the future on that.
So they're laying out an
economist's view vs. practically
what's actually happening
on the ground.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know
that hospital officials in
Oklahoma have said if one of
the versions of this were to
pass, that they thought it would
be devastating on their ability
to take care of low-income
individuals, whether on
Medicaid or otherwise.
What do you say to them,
the folks in your own state?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Yes,
same thing, Judy.
Obviously, they're looking
at just part of a plan.
And I know that my Democratic
colleagues have been very good
for distributing bits and pieces
of plans and saying here is the
whole plan, without actually
putting the full picture
out there for individuals to be
able to see how the stability
works, how aspects of it
work.
They will just put out and
say, this is going to be a cut
that happens to this particular
area.
What will happen?
Immediately, they respond back,
well, that will be dramatic.
Let me give you a for
instance on Medicaid.
I hear a lot of talk about
how Medicaid goes down in
one of the earlier proposals.
Medicaid actually increases
every year for the next eight
years in that proposal by twice
the rate of inflation, and
then nine years from now it
increases at only the rate of
inflation.
That's put out by my Democratic
colleagues as a big cut in
Medicaid because nine years
from now it doesn't increase
as fast, but every single
year it's increasing, and for
the next eight years
it increases twice
as fast as inflation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, I want
to change the subject and ask
you about the attorney general,
Jeff Sessions.
As you know, President Trump
has been publicly criticizing
him for the last several days,
mainly because the attorney
general recused himself from
the Russia investigation.
What do you make of
the president's public
campaign against him?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Yes, it's
something I would never do.
Obviously, the president
is the president.
He can lead his staff
however he chooses.
But I would never say to my
staff in a public setting
that there is a problem.
If I have a problem with a
staff member, they will sit
down with me in my office and we
will sit down and work it out.
And if we can't work it
out, then they will leave.
But that's something we are
going to work out in private,
not in a public setting.
And, quite frankly, Jeff
Sessions had to recuse himself.
That's something all the legal
counsel in the Department
of Justice, once he joined
as the attorney general,
sat down with him, laid
out the law of the statute.
Everyone looked at it's.
Everyone read it exactly
the same way, that Jeff
needed to recuse himself.
Now, did Jeff understand
that before he got there?
No, I don't think he
did, but once he was in
that spot, sitting down
with all the attorneys,
he understand full well
that he had to do that.
I understand that frustrates
the president, but it was
the right thing to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What would
it mean if the president
were to fire the attorney
general or if Jeff
Sessions were to step down
because of this pressure
from the president?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Well, there
would be -- obviously,
the president -- doesn't
have to be just pressure
from the president.
The president chooses who his
staff is, and they all serve at
the pleasure of the president.
So, if any point the president
is uncomfortable with Jeff
Sessions and his leadership, he
can choose to remove him.
That's what the
president does for that.
So, that's not the issue.
The issue is then going
through the process, going
through all of the nomination.
Getting through all that aspect
again starting all over again
and getting someone in will
take months and months.
Right now, the attorney general
is getting a good stride and
dealing with U.S. attorneys
around the country, getting
with his staff, getting on board
with different investigations
that need to be done.
So, I hate to be able to
lose that progress that
is happening right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
would it mean for the
Russia investigation
if that were to happen?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: It
wouldn't change the Russia
investigation at all.
Jeff is completely disconnected
from what is happening in
the Russia investigation.
He's recused himself.
We have had numerous
interactions with
people in the DOJ.
He's not tried to interfere
in that in any way.
That's already in the special
counsel's responsibility.
So, it doesn't change
that investigation at all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And,
finally, Senator, the
president's announcement
by Twitter yesterday
that he wants to ban individuals
who are transgender from
serving in the military?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Yes, we're
trying to get additional
details on what he means by
that, the implementation.
Obviously, the Pentagon
was unaware of an
announcement like that.
The Pentagon was already in a
six-month review dealing with
transgenders in the military,
what that means as far as
costs, unit cohesion, deployment
capabilities, what that means.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Would
you support the ban?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Well, again,
I'm waiting for that six-month
review to come back from the
military officials.
We open up our military to
all aspects for any individual
that comes into the military
that wants to be able to serve.
There are unique issues, not
just with a gay soldier or
member of the military, but of
someone who is in transition.
You deal with medical issues.
You deal with a lot of
additional costs and
implementation, what
happens in a unit based
on that, because that's
-- as you know, that's
not a single surgery.
That's a series of
surgeries that happens.
And it's a long time for them
to be away from their unit.
So, there are additional
questions that are there that
are unique to that, whether that
individual should go through
transition before they come
into the military or after.
All of those things are still
up in the air, and the military
is walking through that right
now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator
James Lankford of
Oklahoma, we thank you.
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Great.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can
continue watching the Senate
as it votes on the health care
measures.
We will be live-streaming
throughout this night
on our Web site.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
It's that time of the year when
many folks flock to beaches,
resort towns and weekend
getaways.
Those communities can be quite
dependent on foreign workers
to help staff them through
the summer season.
But this year has a different
kind of pressure point, as the
Trump administration has pushed
for some big changes
on immigration rules.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman has a look at the impact
of this supply-and-demand
story.
It's part of his weekly
series, Making Sense.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ah, the
iconic seaside summer
getaway Provincetown
at the tip of Cape Cod.
A single mom prison guard in
New York state, Joy McNulty,
got away here to bring up her
four kids in a safe
place and bought a tiny
restaurant, the Lobster Pot.
Forty years later, the family
and about 100 hundred employees
serve 1,200 to 1,300 meals
a day during peak
season, prepared in the
back of the House by
six-month-a-year immigrants
from Jamaica.
McNulty insisted I find out
for myself for how many years
they had been coming, 21 years,
22 years.
You're the new champ, 24.
That beats everybody.
Provincetown has a year-round
population of just under 3,000,
which swells to 10,000 in
the summer.
Add the estimated four to five
million tourists that visit the
Cape every year, and you have
got the poster child
for peak demand.
JOY MCNULTY, Owner, Lobster
Pot: How do you run a business
where all your kids work for
you, all your grandchildren
work for you, and I don't
know if I can open next year?
How could you do that?
PAUL SOLMAN: The problem
is getting Americans, of
any vintage, to do the
back of the housework.
So businesses here rely on
foreigners, says Jane Nichols
Bishop, known as Mama Visa to
the workers.
JANE NICHOLS BISHOP, Owner, Peak
Season Workforce: In a seasonal
economy, there are usually not
enough American workers
to fill all of the jobs.
They're not year-round jobs.
So the Congress allowed
something called an H-2B.
PAUL SOLMAN: Which allows
half-year work if no
one else can be found,
and must be renewed
annually, for temporary
positions like hotel
housekeepers and
restaurant workers.
In the past, Congress has
made 66,000 of these visas
available annually nationwide.
And workers with previous H-2Bs,
like almost everyone here,
could return without being
counted against that
limit, but not this summer.
JANE NICHOLS BISHOP: Congress
didn't pass a returning worker
exemption in the continuing
resolution to fund the
government, which is
where it's always been.
And because they didn't
do that, the number
of visas available was
greatly restricted.
So there are not enough visas
for all the employers to
bring in their temporary work
force.
PAUL SOLMAN: The Department
of Homeland Security did add
another 15,000 visas last week.
But with the exemption
gone, the total number
of H-2Bs is way down.
And with employers now having
to prove irreparable harm to get
one of the additional visas, the
paperwork that might,
or might not, get a
worker in has mushroomed.
What an irony for a supposedly
anti-red tape administration,
says Congressman Bill Keating,
who represents the Cape, though,
of course, he's from a district
even bluer than its fish.
REP.
BILL KEATING (D),
Massachusetts: The fix is
staring us right in the face.
It's just raise the cap
on returning workers.
We have done it for
the last 11 years.
It works.
PAUL SOLMAN: But
they just did it now.
REP.
BILL KEATING: No, they didn't.
They created a whole new series
of regulations and requirements
that would scare any small
business person into not using
this because of politics.
PAUL SOLMAN: Really?
JOY MCNULTY: It's impossible to
run a business when you don't
know if you're getting 43 of
your 96 people.
The rest of them
are all Americans.
This year, we were
open six weeks late.
Last week, we opened
six weeks late.
Next year, we may
not open at all.
We don't know.
PAUL SOLMAN: Gui Yingling got
none of the requested 26 H-2B
workers for nearby Bubala's
By the Bay.
GUI YINGLING, Bubala's By the
Bay: It's been next impossible.
We have had to close days.
We have had to shorten hours.
PAUL SOLMAN: And a corollary
problem, say restaurateurs
like Yingling and Mac Hay of
Mac's Seafood, is that
if and when they close:
MAC HAY, Owner, Mac's Seafood:
I would have to lay off way
more than half of the work
force that I have now.
PAUL SOLMAN: American workers.
MAC HAY: An American work force.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, look, they
say, it's not for lack of
trying, to recruit natives, that
is.
In fact, the H-2B application
requires employers to
offer the jobs locally.
JOY MCNULTY: I advertise
on the Internet.
I advertise in every job fair.
We advertise in every newspaper.
Everyone on the entire
Cape knows that we're
all looking for help.
There's nobody here.
They will not take
seasonal dishwashing and
cook jobs for anything.
PAUL SOLMAN: But wait a second,
counters H-2B skeptic Jessica
Vaughan of the Center for
Immigration Studies.
JESSICA VAUGHAN, Center
for Immigration Studies:
I don't think there's
any such thing as a
job an American won't do.
There are millions of workers
in the United States who are
not employed, and we need to
find a way to match them
up with some of these
opportunities as well.
PAUL SOLMAN: Employers just
aren't trying hard enough,
Vaughan insists, while driving
down wages, and maybe
even working conditions.
More and more, she says,
teens and those with a high
school diploma at best:
JESSICA VAUGHAN: Employers
should look to those workers
first before they take the easy
route out, and bring in
workers from overseas.
MAC HAY: I have no
issue, no problem.
I would prefer to do that.
Trying to bring workers
from Jamaica or Mexico is
incredibly challenging,
incredibly expensive.
PAUL SOLMAN: Mac Hay worked in
kitchens on the Cape since he
was 12, now owns six businesses,
restaurants and seafood markets.
The pay?
MAC HAY: A dishwasher is
$12.50 to a cook can make $17,
$18 an hour, plus overtime.
PAUL SOLMAN: Not bad.
So why aren't these
summer jobs for students?
MAC HAY: The majority of
them leave August 12 or
August 13 or August 14.
We have a 10-week season.
It runs through Labor Day.
I can't lose more than half
my work force with three weeks
to go, with 30 percent of
my season left.
PAUL SOLMAN: And nonstudents
who are un- or under-employed?
MAC HAY: Americans, they
don't want to relocate
their life for six months.
They don't want to move down,
but if they're willing to do
it, I'm more than happy to hire
them.
PAUL SOLMAN: Like Joy McNulty
at the Lobster Pot, Mac Hay
utterly depends on visa workers.
Egan Bonny's been with
him for 10 seasons.
EGAN BONNY, Mac's Seafood: I do
cleaning, clean the restaurant
and do all kind of jobs
which no American kids
would come and do.
This grease job here,
fill the grease job.
No young kid's going to come
around and do this stuff.
Keep everything nice,
clean the bathroom.
PAUL SOLMAN: Because
they're spoiled?
EGAN BONNY: They're spoiled.
Seriously, they're spoiled.
PAUL SOLMAN: Really?
There is no wage at which
they would do these jobs?
GUI YINGLING: I have hired
every employee who has tried
to walk through the door.
I have advertised.
Most of them don't show up, is
the truth, once I hire them.
It's pretty incredible.
I have had 17 employees no-show
this season, after being hired.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, we did
run into one underemployed
American worker.
So what are you
doing this summer?
CLAIRE VAUGHAN, Student:
I'm working in a church
nursery every Sunday.
PAUL SOLMAN: And you have
applied for other jobs.
CLAIRE VAUGHAN:
Yes, that's right.
PAUL SOLMAN: And?
CLAIRE VAUGHAN: I have not
heard back from any of them.
PAUL SOLMAN: Seventeen-year
old Claire Vaughan lives
about two hours from the Cape.
PAUL SOLMAN: So now,
why aren't you here?
CLAIRE VAUGHAN: I didn't
know there were jobs here.
I had no idea you could do that.
PAUL SOLMAN: Claire Vaughan
happens to be the daughter
of our immigration skeptic.
CLAIRE VAUGHAN: Now
that I know about it,
I will definitely look.
PAUL SOLMAN: But it turned
that she, like most students,
would have to leave before
the season was over.
And her parents didn't want
her living on the Cape.
And so we come to
the bottom line.
Bubala's is down 10
percent and may actually
lose money this year.
Mac Hay worries about next year.
And the Lobster Pot?
In the six weeks it had to
close, it bought a lot fewer
lobsters from local fishermen,
hired fewer Americans
for fewer hours.
JOY MCNULTY: All of the
Americans are out of
work for six extra weeks.
The state doesn't get the
taxes, the vendors don't get
the work, nothing happens here,
and the town collapses.
But my people have been with me
for 20, 25 years, a lot of them.
What harm is that to anybody?
We just want to
run a restaurant.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the
"PBS NewsHour," this is
economics correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting
from Cape Cod.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the
"NewsHour": from the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf, a war
correspondent's love of Africa;
and a Brief But Spectacular
take on frivolous art.
As senators continue their
fight over health care, there
are new feuds bubbling on the
other end of
Pennsylvania Avenue.
From cracking down on
leaks to weighing Attorney
General Jeff Sessions'
future, and the president
calling for an end to
transgender military
service members, the
White House is putting
out a number of fires this week.
We turn to Karine Jean-Pierre.
She's a senior adviser to
MoveOn.org and a veteran of
the Obama administration.
And Matt Schlapp, he's
the chairman of the
American Conservative
Union and the former
deputy political director
for President George W. Bush.
And welcome to both of
you, Matt and Karine.
Speaking of fires, I have to
ask both of you first about a
story, a remarkable story that
has just appeared late
this afternoon in "The New
Yorker" magazine, Matt.
Essentially it's the new
head of communications at
the White House, Anthony
Scaramucci, placing
a phone call last night
to the writer Ryan
Lizza and screaming at
him, wanting to know
who leaked information
about a dinner, using
very strong language,
threatening -- virtually
threatening him, saying, I need
to know who the leakers are,
saying he's gone to the FBI,
the Department of Justice.
What's going on at
the White House?
MATT SCHLAPP, Former White
House Director of Political
Affairs: Well, on my drive over
to the studio, I was going to
have my 14-year-old daughter
read this article to me.
I'm glad I didn't,
because it does have
some colorful language.
I think Anthony Scaramucci
is already out on
Twitter apologizing
for the language, but
I think the key here is
that this whole question
of leaks inside the
West Wing, it is a real
cancer.
And for those of us who want
President Trump to succeed in
his agenda, to succeed, it's
been a real distraction to
getting the agenda through.
And I think Scaramucci's trying
to take care of the leaks,
and, unfortunately, he thought
he was having a conversation
that was off-the-record,
but apparently he didn't
make that clear to
the reporter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karine, what
does it say when you have this
level of leaking and animosity
going on inside the
White House this early
in the administration?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE,
Democratic Strategist:
Well, it's quite insane.
I worked in the White House
in the Obama administration.
I have never seen
anything like this before.
But if this is Scaramucci's
role, is to take care of the
leaks, that's really going to
be a full-time job for him.
And, honestly, Judy, if he is
-- if that is something that
he's truly working on, he needs
to start in the Oval Office.
He needs to start from
the top all the way down.
That's where the leaks are.
It's not the junior staffers.
It's the senior staffers,
starting with Donald
Trump, the president.
And the senior staffers are
just trying the save their jobs.
And that's why they're
leaking the way that they are.
But, also, this is a reason
why for the first six months of
the administration, that this
administration has not been
able to get anything done.
They have not really passed
one piece of major legislation,
because of stuff like this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt, what
about that, the fact that it's
just -- it's not just -- it's
not lower-level people who
are talking to the press; it's
people up and down and going
all the way to the top
of the White House?
MATT SCHLAPP: Yes.
So, I mean, there are
always leaks that come
out of the White House.
And, sometimes, those leaks are
intended to inform the press in
kind of an anonymous fashion.
But what's happened in the
Trump White House, it's just a
melee of weeks, where people are
leaking on each other
in the West Wing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why?
MATT SCHLAPP: I think that the
White House - - the West Wing
wasn't set up to be efficient
and successful from
the very beginning.
I think they actually can look
at the way that they set up
the West Wing, and there's
not a kind of a sheriff in town.
I remember, when I worked for
Andy Card in the West Wing,
and he told me, especially
when I took the job as political
director, he said, if you
miss -- if you overstep your
trust with the president, there
will be a cardboard box on
your desk, fill it and leave.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Well, I was struck.
I just...
MATT SCHLAPP: Now, he didn't
do that to me, but he would
have done it had I overstepped
the boundaries.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to stay
with you just a moment, Matt,
because there is a line in
here that really strikes me.
Ryan Lizza with "The New
Yorker" writes, he said: "Unlike
other Trump advisers, I have
never heard him," meaning
Scaramucci, "say a bad
word about the president."
So he's saying everybody
else is criticizing the
president who hired them.
MATT SCHLAPP: Well, I don't
want the get into - - I don't
know these conversations.
All I can tell you is that
one of the issues, as the West
Wing was pulled together, the
staff was pulled together, is
it was kind of an interesting
concoction of people that
weren't really with the
president's campaign.
So, he did pull together people,
maybe in the hopes to kind
of like bring kind of unity
to the party.
But it has always been fearful
that you had people who were
either never-Trump or didn't
have much respect for the Trump
-- for President Trump who got
senior administration positions.
And I worked for a Republican
president who I admired and
who I loved and I would have
just done almost anything for
professionally, and when you
don't have that spirit with some
staffers, it can cause
a lot of problems.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karine, I know
I'm asking you as an outsider
and somebody from the other
party to weigh in on this, but
do you see a solution here?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE:
No, not at all.
Look, I think I have said this
before on your show, Judy,
which is the fish rots at his
head.
This is the type of environment
that Donald Trump has set up.
He's brought in the
corporate life, the way he
was as a CEO, as the head
of Trump Organization,
and brought it into
the White House.
He loves this stuff.
He loves the inter-fighting.
He likes when they're fighting
for his -- the dear leader
affection of Donald Trump.
And so it's not going
to -- it doesn't matter
if it's Scaramucci.
It doesn't matter who it is.
It doesn't matter if
Priebus stays or leaves.
It starts with the person at the
top, and that's Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, one
other -- two other things I
want to ask you both about,
but first the announcement
by Twitter yesterday
from the president that
he wanted to ban all
people who are transgender
from serving in the military.
And, Matt, I want to go back
and remind -- show everybody in
our audience, this is what the
president had to say last year,
just a year ago, that this
was the day after the Orlando
nightclub shooting.
He gave a national security
speech in New Hampshire, and
here's what he had to say.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: Ask yourself,
who is really the friend of
women and the LB -- and
LGBT community, Donald
Trump, with actions, or
Hillary Clinton, with
her words?
I will tell you who the better
friend is, and, someday, I
believe that will be proven
out bigly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Matt,
how do you explain the
transgender military decision?
MATT SCHLAPP: Well, for
seven-and-a-half years of
the Obama administration,
they had a prohibition
that equates to what
President Trump announced.
Now, all we have is a tweet.
I don't know what
it means in detail.
I don't know what it means for
the people serving, but you
get to this basic question,
right, which is, you know,
what do the commanders
want in the field, right?
And I think that what was
intended by this administration,
at least what Sarah Huckabee
Sanders said, to expand upon the
tweet, was that he is listening
to the services and what
they want.
And for seven-and-a-half years
in the Obama administration,
they had a similar plan, not
because I think there was
animus towards transgender
people or the gay community.
I think it was because they were
simply focusing on what generals
were saying they needed to
be ready in the field.
But this will all be
handled in Congress.
The funding all goes through
Congress, and we will have a
democratic debate on whether
or not this should
happen or not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Karine, the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, General Joe Dunford,
said today that -- they said,
we're waiting for guidance.
Right now, we want to
continue to respect
everybody in the military.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE:
That's right, Judy.
Look, usually, when
you make this type of
policy, you articulate
it on paper, you create
a policy.
You don't tweet about it.
And so the Pentagon can't
actually act on this.
They can't act on a tweet.
They were never given
a piece of policy.
And so, once again, you have
a president who doesn't care
to learn, who doesn't know how
the process works, and
he uses Twitter to put --
to really feed his base.
And that's what we're seeing.
And, look, the other part about
this, too, is that he made that
promise during the election.
It was an outrageous
comment when we heard it.
No one ever -- no one
really, truly believed it.
And it became a lie on day
one of his administration.
This is not an administration
that cares about brown people,
black people or transgendered
or LGBT communities.
We have seen this -- or women.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt?
MATT SCHLAPP: I don't think
that accurately describes
Donald Trump's heart.
I have talked to him about
these sets of issues.
For seven-and-a-half years
of the Obama administration,
they had the very same policy.
And I don't think that President
Obama was discriminating
for those seven-and-a-half
years.
And I think the
next question on...
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're saying
it was only at the end when
they changed the policy.
MATT SCHLAPP: They
changed it at the end.
But, really, the military
hasn't understood how
to implement this.
And Secretary of Defense
Mattis and all of the service
chiefs knew that they were in
the process of review.
They have been discussing this.
People who track this issue knew
that they were trying to figure
out, could this be implemented
or not?
JUDY WOODRUFF: But
still no paper.
It was a tweet.
MATT SCHLAPP: Well,
the announcement is
completely unconventional.
It's hard for somebody
like me to even explain
what the implications are.
The country needs
the details on this.
So, I think Karine's point
on that is very fair.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly,
finally, to both of you, Karine.
You expect the attorney general
to stay where he is, Jeff
Sessions, given what's going on?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE:
Well, I will try to be
really quick here, Judy.
Look, I do not think the
attorney general should
be the attorney general.
I think he is a racist.
I think he has
racist background.
And he lied and perjured
himself in front of Congress.
But that's not the reason
why Donald Trump doesn't
want him in the job anymore.
He doesn't want him in the job
because of the Russia thing.
He wants -- he was upset
that Sessions didn't
recuse himself, and he
wants to fire Bob Mueller.
That's why he wants to
get rid of Sessions.
MATT SCHLAPP: President Trump
doesn't want Jeff Sessions to
leave the office of the attorney
general.
I think what President Trump
is saying is, he's frustrated
that a special counsel was
picked without it even being
run by Jeff Sessions, and
that that investigation
seems to be overshadowing
his presidency.
When you have seen the leaks
that have come out against
Donald Trump, when you have seen
that the DNC has a
staffer that's worked
with the government of
Ukraine, there are plenty
of things on the other side
of the ledger that I think
Republicans would like to see
DOJ look at as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He's been pretty
tough on this attorney general,
though, the last few days.
MATT SCHLAPP: He has been.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt
Schlapp, Karine
Jean-Pierre, thank you both.
MATT SCHLAPP: Thank you, Judy.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE:
Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We
close tonight with two
affectionate looks at Africa.
First, a journalist's
love of the continent,
family and his craft.
Jeffrey Brown begins with
our latest addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: As a
19-year-old college
student, Jeffrey Gettleman
traveled to East Africa
and fell in love with a place.
He also fell in love that
year with a woman back home.
Their time together and apart,
and his life and work covering
a continent as a Pulitzer
Prize-winning correspondent for
The New York Times, make up the
story told in "Love, Africa:
A Memoir of Romance,
War, and Survival."
Jeffrey Gettleman joins me now.
Welcome to you.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN,
Author, "Love, Africa: A
Memoir of Romance, War,
and Survival": Thank
you.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is a place,
a region that you have looked
at for a long time in a certain
voice, right, as journalist.
But now you're presenting
a different voice.
What is this?
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: Well, I feel
very conflicted about my work
sometimes in Africa, because,
as journalists, we
focus on conflict.
We focus on argument
and dispute.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is
the way we hear about
Africa most of the time.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: And this
is true for all journalists.
But my job as a journalist
in East Africa, I'm often
steeped in these conflicts.
But that wasn't why I came to
East Africa in the first place.
I came on a safari as
a student and was blown
away by the warmth, by
the sense of connectedness
between people, like, just
a different way of life.
And so this book, to me,
is a bit of an escape.
You know, often, we get
frustrated with what's
happening in today's world.
We feel sort of the woes
of the world on our back.
And I wanted to write a book
that celebrated something
that meant a lot to me.
JEFFREY BROWN: You were
drawn to this place.
It wasn't real obvious why.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: I think,
thinking more deeply about
what it was that really moved
me, it was experiencing a
part of the world that's very
different from how I grew up in
suburban Chicago, how most
of us grew up, a lot poorer,
a lot less developed.
But there was this spirit,
this sense of warmth and
openness among people.
Even though I had so much more
than the people I was around,
I felt very little resentment.
I felt very little bitterness.
I felt welcome in a part of
the world that couldn't be
any more different from what I
experienced.
JEFFREY BROWN: There is a
kind of fraught situation of
writing about Africa always,
right, how to
write about Africa.
You have to deal with that, as
a journalist and in this case.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: And I was
trying to be honest about that
in this book, because there's
many books written by
passing correspondents.
And the term in Africa
is mzungu, which means
white man, like gringo.
I cover these conflicts, I go
into a famine zone, I go into
a part of South Sudan where
people are killing each
other, and they're stuck.
Their houses have been burned.
They have lost everything
they have owned.
They have lost loved ones.
They're sharing their misery
with me, and I am dutifully
recording it in my notebook,
and then transmitting
it to the world.
And then I get on a plane and
take off, and go back to my
wife and kids and my comfortable
life.
And that's morally
problematic in some ways.
But that's my role.
We all have our roles.
The aid workers have their
roles in delivering aid.
The militaries have their
role in providing security.
And, as a journalist, my role
is to just try and gather as
much material, and open a window
to a different
part of the world.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, in this
book, there is the other part
of the love story, which is
your wife, who you
now go home too.
But you're open about the
problems of a marriage amid
the life you are leading.
She leaves behind a
life as a lawyer to
come and work with you.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: i think what
we struggled with is what a
lot of young people struggle
with.
We were both really determined
to pursue our careers.
She was dead set on being a
criminal defense attorney.
I really wanted to
be a journalist.
We had to go where the jobs
took us, and we did a lot of
damage to our relationship.
And we didn't respect and honor
what we suspected that we had,
which was a very special bond.
And there were years that we
screwed it up, and we threw
away a lot of time together.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's not
giving away the ending to say
that it worked out, right?
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: Yes, we
were lucky enough to finally
sort of see which way is up.
And we have a wonderful
life in Kenya.
It's a great place
to raise a family.
We have two little boys
that were born there.
JEFFREY BROWN: What do you want
to convey here that we either
miss as viewer or watchers
of the world, or that
America itself misses,
right, in its policy?
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN:
Where do I begin?
OK, a couple quick things.
One is, in a lot of these
really bad situations,
there is an undercurrent
of hope, and of dignity,
and of humanity, and community.
For instance, I covered the
Westgate Mall massacre, where
some terrorists came into
a crowded mall in Nairobi, and
gunned down dozens of people.
They didn't kill more people,
because there was a response by
neighborhood police officers,
who were much more lightly
armed than these terrorists
that had assault rifles.
And these guys went streaming
into this mall, under fire, with
these cheap pistols, fighting
against these terrorists.
They were taking shots, they
were getting hit, they were
getting wounded, and they kept
going.
These guys came in as
basically volunteers,
and saved a lot of lives.
So, even in this moment, that
was there was still an element
of humanity, and community,
and pulling together
at the right time.
And I have seen that in war
zones, and in battle zones,
and in famine situations.
The one other thing I think is,
a lot of the problems in Africa
are because of things that
happened outside of
Africa, or because of
American policy especially.
And I wrote a bit in
this book about the
mistakes that the American
government has made under
different administrations.
It wasn't a Republican
problem or a Democrat problem.
It was kind of a
lack of interest.
And the results were famine,
and chaos, and pirates.
But some of that was because of
specific decisions the American
government had made that were
bad decisions and led to
a whole chain of events.
But in this part of the world,
a lot of people aren't paying
that close of attention.
And so I felt that it was my
responsibility to write a very
personal book, an accessible
book, a kind of escape,
adventure story, but
to do some educating.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
the book is "Love, Africa."
Jeffrey Gettleman,
thank you very much.
JEFFREY GETTLEMAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Read Jeffrey
Gettleman's reflections
on closing The New
York Times' East Africa
bureau.
His essay was published
by The Times today.
And staying on the subject
of Africa, we turn to
another in our Brief
But Spectacular series,
where we ask people to
describe their passions.
Tonight, Kenyan filmmaker Wanuri
Kahiu, who's using a new style
to tell modern African stories.
WANURI KAHIU, Filmmaker: I am
a filmmaker and storyteller.
And I have made films
and written stories
about rusted robots that
fall in love, Nairobi
pop bands that want to go to
space, girls who want to race
camels in the future, girls
who want to dance in the
future, anything that's fun,
fizz, and frivolous coming out
of Africa.
A couple of years ago, I was
writing a love story, and I
was looking for funding for it.
And when I said I was
looking for a love
story, and I approached
investors, one of them to
me, if you add a rape
scene, then we might be able
to get you some funding.
And this was devastating to me.
It felt as if Africans just
can't fall in love or be joyous.
There has to be some sort of
tragedy linked to their love.
And I completely,
completely reject that idea.
And so I pushed back with this
idea of Afro Bubble Gum art
that means we can be just for
being's sake.
We can just create
for creating's sake.
It doesn't have
to have an issue.
I always knew I wanted
to create stories.
But the more I started to
create, I started to realize
that I wasn't seeing myself in
these films.
All I could do was write stories
that represented the people
that I knew and the people that
I grew up with.
But I didn't realize at
the time that I was making
a political statement.
I was just making films
with black people in them.
I think it's so important to
see diversity in front of the
camera, if for no other reason
so that, when my daughter
asks me about the princesses
that she sees, and she doesn't
see any black princesses, I
can say, well, there's others.
So, thank God for Doc
McStuffins, who's completely
saved my daughter's
life, because she can
finally see an image of
herself on the screen.
And we work to represent other
people, so that the children
who grow up after my children
can also see images of
themselves, so that they can see
that they belong in the world
that they live in as well.
My name is Wanuri Kahiu, and
this is my Brief But Spectacular
take on Afro Bubble Gum.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
can watch more Brief But
Spectacular videos online
at PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
Online right now: a reminder
that you can continue watching
the Senate as it votes on
the health care measures
throughout this night.
And you can find a live-stream
of the action on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening with
Mark Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.